```
Table 2: Descriptive statistics across all experimental stimuli inall
conditions.
Text Length Word Length Zipf Freq. Flesch Surp. GPT-2
mean 86.515 5.16 5.644 43.035 4.018
std 20.675 0.519 0.229 22.631 3.77
min 25.0 3.621 4.827 4.783 0.0
max 130.0 6.66 6.406 108.073 30.897
```

```
Table 3: Descriptive statistics foreach model.
Text Length Word Length Zipf Freq. Flesch Surp. GPT-2
```

```
Phi-2
```

```
mean 84.327 5.131 5.686 40.228 4.0
std 26.246 0.571 0.217 25.755 3.728
min 25.0 3.795 4.889 11.623 0.0
max 130.0 6.411 6.189 105.304 30.897
```

```
Mistral
```

```
mean 89.995 5.155 5.643 44.775 3.935
std 19.287 0.462 0.234 20.18 3.714
min 37.0 3.621 4.943 5.949 0.0
max 124.0 6.66 6.406 100.731 30.897
```

```
WizardLM
```

```
mean 84.786 5.189 5.611 43.54 4.121
std 16.097 0.53 0.23 22.172 3.859
min 28.0 3.903 4.827 4.783 0.0
max 118.0 6.405 6.117 108.073 30.897
```

did not refer to the text directly but to world knowledge about the topic of the text.
We further re-attributed the positions of correct answers such that their ultimate
distribution (i.e., whether the correct answer was answer a, b, c, or d) is uniform.

### 4.4 Descriptive Statistics of the Generated Stimuli

We provide the descriptive statistics of a selection of the lexical characteristics of the
stimuli. Table 2 depicts the overall average text length, the average word length, the
average Zipf frequency, the average Flesch reading ease score, and the average surprisal
value extracted from GPT-2base.
The same statistics can be found in Table 3, where they are averaged not across all
stimuli but across those stimuli generated by one LLM. Mistral produces, on average,
the longest texts, and while WizardLM and Phi-2 are equal with respect to text length,
Phi-2 exhibits the greatest variability of all three models. According to the Flesch
score, Phi-2 also appears to generate, on average, slightly easier texts than the other
two models, although its standard deviation is again highest.
In Table 4, the same lexical characteristics are displayed across text types. As to be
expected, we observe a high degree of variability within theunconstrainedtext types,
withnon-fictionandfictionproducing the longest texts andpoetrythe shortest. The
constrainedtext types’ average text lengths are closer together in magnitude, with
summarizationproducing, on average, the shortest texts, probably owing to the nature

```
Table 4: Descriptive statistics for eachgeneration task.
Text Length Word Length Zipf Freq. Flesch Surp. GPT-2
Unconstrained
```

```
Non-fiction
```

```
mean 96.247 5.276 5.706 41.635 3.703
std 16.071 0.412 0.182 15.482 3.378
min 44.0 3.901 5.139 12.497 0.0
max 127.0 6.217 6.189 91.995 27.205
```

```
Fiction
```

```
mean 93.536 4.608 5.806 72.119 3.598
std 16.315 0.398 0.19 17.238 3.473
min 42.0 3.853 5.178 46.583 0.0
max 130.0 5.59 6.086 108.073 30.897
```

```
Poetry
```

```
mean 57.518 4.493 5.628 50.667 5.743
std 11.623 0.365 0.311 33.947 4.412
min 37.0 3.621 4.943 51.959 0.0
max 84.0 5.25 6.406 91.445 30.897
Constrained
```

```
Summarization
```

```
mean 78.071 5.28 5.538 40.199 4.549
std 19.573 0.36 0.22 18.882 4.103
min 28.0 4.514 4.827 18.176 0.0
max 113.0 6.303 5.976 77.069 24.651
```

```
Synopsis
```

```
mean 88.878 5.48 5.51 27.874 4.119
std 17.407 0.376 0.184 11.435 3.99
min 40.0 4.5 5.016 5.949 0.0
max 128.0 6.66 5.876 59.635 29.789
```

```
Key words
```

```
mean 89.488 5.413 5.677 32.898 3.604
std 20.497 0.409 0.188 14.306 3.541
min 25.0 4.649 5.259 4.783 0.0
max 124.0 6.411 6.048 62.19 29.315
```

of the task. There are also discernible differences pertaining to Flesch reading ease: the
fictiontexts are, on average, the most difficult ones, followed bypoetry, which exhibits
the highest variability in difficulty; the articles generated based on an articlesynopsis
are on average the easiest, according to the Flesch score. Regarding surprisal, thepoetry
texts contain, on average, the words with the highest surprisal, as opposed tofiction,
with the lowest average surprisal score, followed by the texts composed based onkey
words. Overall, these statistics align with our expectations for the distinct text types.
Table 5 displays the lexical characteristics averaged over decoding strategies. There
is little variability with respect to average text length, average word length, and
Zipf frequency across decoding strategies (although beware that these metrics are
computed after the post-processing of the generated texts, see Section 4.1.3). The
greatest differences occur with regard to the Flesch reading ease: greedy search and
beam search appear to produce slightly more difficult texts than random sampling and
top-psampling. Concerning surprisal, random sampling produces, on average, words
with the highest surprisal value, although this stands somewhat in contrast to random
sampling having the lowest Flesch reading ease score. Tables detailing these lexical

```
Table 5: Descriptive statistics for eachdecoding strategy.
Text Length Word Length Zipf Freq. Flesch Surp. GPT-2
```

```
Greedy search
```

```
mean 85.77 5.11 5.675 44.542 3.914
std 20.322 0.526 0.229 22.849 3.698
min 40.0 3.621 4.951 7.097 0.0
max 126.0 6.032 6.406 103.438 30.897
```

```
Beam search
```

```
mean 86.714 5.152 5.629 44.522 3.945
std 17.479 0.511 0.23 22.199 3.779
min 44.0 3.903 4.827 8.631 0.0
max 118.0 6.012 6.045 103.673 30.897
```

```
Sampling
```

```
mean 85.817 5.208 5.629 41.517 4.116
std 20.824 0.524 0.233 22.381 3.836
min 34.0 3.853 4.889 5.949 0.0
max 127.0 6.66 6.117 108.073 30.897
```

```
Top-k
```

```
mean 87.635 5.165 5.641 43.872 4.088
std 22.527 0.523 0.234 22.382 3.806
min 28.0 3.804 4.999 6.508 0.0
max 128.0 6.411 6.112 108.073 30.897
```

```
Top-p
```

```
mean 86.706 5.163 5.64 41.218 4.002
std 21.166 0.511 0.223 23.321 3.727
min 25.0 3.795 4.952 4.783 0.0
max 130.0 6.33 6.191 105.246 30.897
```

characteristics for each model and each decoding strategy separately can be found in
Appendix A.4.
We further compute the correlations between texts generated with the same decoding
strategy (across all three LLMs) for the lexical characteristics text length, word length,
Zipf frequency, and GPT-2base surprisal, as depicted in Figure 5. The greatest
differences in correlation strength between the different decoding strategies occurs when
being computed for the text length feature, ranging from 0.48 (correlation between
greedy search and top-ksampling) to 0.73 (beam search and greedy search). The
least variability across correlation statistics occurs regarding surprisal extracted from
the smaller GPT-2basemodel, with the strongest correlations occurring for beam
search and greedy search, and for beam search and top-psampling. Since the decoding
strategies can be grouped into two categories (likelihood maximization methods, which
include greedy search and beam search; and stochastic methods, which include random
sampling, top-ksampling, and top-psampling), one might expect that those belonging
to the same category displayed stronger correlations as opposed to across categories.
However, for all lexical metrics except surprisal, top-psampling seems to correlate
less strongly with the other stochastic methods than with the likelihood maximization
methods.

```
Fig. 1: Text length. Fig. 2: Word length.
```

```
Fig. 3: Zipf frequency. Fig. 4: GPT-2basesurprisal.
```

Fig. 5: Correlations between texts produced by different decoding strategies for four
different text metrics.

## 5 Eye-Tracking Experiment

### 5.1 Participants

In total, 119 native speakers of English and with normal or corrected-to-normal vision
participated in the experiment in Zurich, Switzerland. Out of these, we discarded
the data of 12 participants due to insufficient data quality or bad calibration, which
results in data of a total of 107 participants in the corpus. The participants are from
various backgrounds and were recruited in a variety of ways: via the University of
Zurich; Facebook groups such asExpats in Switzerland,English-speaking jobs in Zurich,
andAu-Pairs in Switzerland; newsletters; the Democrats Abroad Switzerland; and
the American Women’s Club Switzerland. Before commencing the experiment, they
filled out a short questionnaire that inquired about their age, gender, amount of
sleep, handedness, visual aids, possible second native languages, their English variant,

```
Table 6: Overview of the participants’ mean age and a selection of other statistics.
Number of
participants Gender
```

```
Mean age
±sd
```

```
Mean hours of
sleep±(sd)
```

```
Visual
aid^1
```

```
Myopia/
hyperopia^2 Astigmatism
67 female 32.5±12.0 7.3±1.0 g: 36; s: 2 m: 31; h: 7 yes: 15
n: 29 n: 29 no: 52
39 male 37.1±15.7 7.0±1.0 g: 21; s: 2 m: 15; h: 8 yes: 8
n: 16 n: 16 no: 31
1 other 33 5 g: 1; n: - m: 1; h: - yes: 1
n: - n: - no: -
107 34.1±13.5 7.2±1.0
g: 53; s: 4 m: 47; h: 15 yes: 24
n: 50 n: 45 no: 83
```

(^1) “g” = glasses; “s” = soft contact lenses; “n” = no visual aid
(^2) “m” = myopic (short-sighted); “h” = hyperopic (far-sighted), “n” = neither
Table 7: Distribution of variants of
English across participants.
English Variety Number of Speakers
American 45
British 33
Canadian 8
Australian 7
Indian 3
Irish 3
Scottish 3
New Zealand 2
Gibraltar 1
South African 1
Zimbabwe 1
astigmatism, myopia and hyperopia, and neurological disorders. An overview of selected
characteristics is depicted in Table 6. All participant characteristics and information
can be found in the fileparticipantinfo/participantinfo.csv.
Participation requirements entailed being 18 years old or older, having normal or
corrected-to-normal vision, and being a native English speaker. There was no restriction
pertaining to the variety of English; the distribution of English varieties spoken by
the participants is displayed in Table 7. Participants were requested to not consume
alcohol the night before or the day of the experiment. In case of wearing contact lenses,
they were asked to wear their glasses, if available, and bring the contact lenses along.
They were further asked not to wear eye makeup. Participants received a compensation
of 30 CHF for an estimated 1 hour of participation.

### 6.4 Computation of Reading Measures

From the fixation data, we computed a range of reading measures commonly used in
reading research. The interest areas for the reading measures are equal to the ones of
the fixation data; each reading measure is mapped to a white-space delimited word.
This also entails that punctuation marks are not areas of interest on their own, but
fixations landed on them are mapped to the preceding word, or to the subsequent word
in case of opening quotation marks or parentheses. The abbreviations and definitions
of the computed reading measures are provided in Table 8.

```
Table 8: Definition and abbreviation of reading measures computed for EMTeC.
Measure Abbr. Definition
Continuous measures in ms
first-fixation duration FFD duration of the first fixation on a word if this word is fixated in
first-pass reading, otherwise 0
first duration FD duration of the first fixation on a word (identical to FFD if not
skipped in the first-pass)
first-pass reading time FPRT sum of the durations of all first-pass fixations on a word (0 if the
word was skipped in the first-pass)
single-fixation duration SFD duration of the only first-pass fixation on a word, 0 if the word
was skipped or more than one fixations occurred in the first-pass
(equals FFD in case of a single first-pass fixation)
first-reading time FRT sum of the duration of all fixations from first fixating the word
(independent if the first fixations occurs in first-pass reading) until
leaving the word for the first time (equals FPRT in case the word
was fixated in the first-pass)
total-fixation time TFT sum of all fixations on a word (FPRT+RRT)
re-reading time RRT sum of the durations of all fixations on a word that do not belong
to the first-pass (TFT-FPRT)
inclusive regression-
path duration
```

```
RPDinc sum of all fixation durations starting from the first first-pass
fixation on a word until fixation a word to the right of this word
(including all regressive fixations on previous words), 0 if the word
was not fixated in the first-pass (RPDexc+RBRT)
exclusive regression-
path duration
```

```
RPDexc sum of all fixation durations after initiating a first-pass regression
from a word until fixating a word to the right of this word, without
counting fixations on the word itself (RPDinc-RBRT)
right-bounded reading
time
```

```
RBRT sum of all fixation durations on a word until a word to the right
of this word is fixated (RPDinc-RPDexc)
Binary measures
fixation Fix 1 if the word was fixated, otherwise 0 (FPF or RR)
first-pass fixation FPF 1 if the word was fixated in the first-pass, otherwise 0
first-pass regression FPReg 1 if a regression was initiated in the first-pass reading of the word,
otherwise 0 (RPDexc)
re-reading RR 1 if the word was fixated after the first-pass reading, otherwise 0
(RRT)
Discrete measures
total fixation count TFC total number of fixations on that
incoming saccade
length
```

```
SLin length of the saccade that leads to first fixation on a word in
number of words; positive sign if the saccade is a progressive one,
negative sign if it is a regression
outgoing saccade
length
```

```
SLout length of the first saccade that leaves the word in number of words;
positive sign if the saccade is a progressive one, negative sign if it
is a regression; 0 if the word is never fixated
total count of
incoming regressions
```

```
TRCin total number of regressive saccades initiated from this word
total count of outgoing
regressions
```

```
TRCout total number of regressive saccades landing on this word
```

## 7 Analyses

### 7.1 Descriptive Statistics of the Reading Measures

We provide descriptive statistics of a selection of reading measures: the continuous
measuresfirst-fixation duration(FFD; duration of the first fixation on a word if it was
fixated in first-pass reading),first-pass reading time(FPRT; sum of the durations of
all first-pass fixations on a word),total-fixation time(TFT; sum of the durations of all
fixations on a word), andre-reading time(RRT; sum of the durations of all fixations
on a word that do not belong to the first-pass); and the binary measuresfixation(Fix;
whether or not a word was fixated) andre-reading(RR; whether or not a word was
fixated after the first-pass reading).
Table 9 depicts statistics on the reading measures with respect to outputs of the
individual models. We observe minimal variation both with respect to mean values as
well as standard deviations between models, indicating that the reading behavior does
not drastically change according to which model the respective texts were generated
with. WizardLM seems to have slightly higher values across all metrics; for instance,
words in texts generated by WizardLM display a higher re-reading time than words of
texts originating from the other two models.

```
Table 9: Descriptive statistics of a selection of reading measures
for each model. See Table 8 for a definition of the different
reading measures.^1
Phi-2 Mistral WizardLM
Mean and standard deviation of continuous measures in ms
FFD 223.165±101.362 222.166±103.895 222.414±100.985
FPRT 268.674±154.69 265.261±151.312 266.831±151.84
TFT 326.477±226.091 325.399±230.474 327.748±231.686
RRT 295.616±213.118 300.596±224.297 304.003±229.13
Mean proportions of the binary measures
Fix 0.694 0.694 0.695
RR 0.221 0.22 0.221
```

(^1) For the statistics of FFD, FPRT, TFT, and RRT, words with a value of 0
(not fixated) were excluded.
Statistics on the same reading measures pertaining to outputs generated with
different decoding strategies are provided in Table 10. Again, there is little variability
between the different decoding strategies regardingfirst-fixation durationandfirst-pass
reading time. Concerningtotal-fixation time, it appears that words in texts generated
with beam search are fixated for a longer time overall, while those generated with
greedy search have the overall lowest total fixation durations. A similar pattern can be
observed with respect tore-reading time: words in the beam search outputs that are re-
read are fixated for a longer time than words of other outputs; and greedy search output
words are re-read for the shortest amount of time. This higher value of TFT in poems
is probably accounted for by a longer re-reading time compared to the other text types.

```
Table 10: Descriptive statistics of a selection of reading
measures for each decoding strategy. See Table 8 for a
definition of the different reading measures.^1
Greedy search Beam search
Mean and standard deviation of continuous measures in ms
FFD 221.162±101.095 223.534±106.072
FPRT 265.048±152.407 266.682±153.026
TFT 323.098±228.944 331.051±239.462
RRT 296.862±222.448 309.743±237.347
Mean proportions of the binary measures
Fix 0.693 0.692
RR 0.22 0.223
```

```
Sampling Top-k Top-p
Mean and standard deviation of continuous measures in ms
FFD 223.013±102.286 223.297±102.994 221.962±99.678
FPRT 267.644±153.084 267.573±151.439 266.781±152.463
TFT 329.343±233.574 325.505±224.761 325.131±224.759
RRT 304.87±228.032 296.272±214.337 297.34±216.7
Mean proportions of the binary measures
Fix 0.697 0.696 0.693
RR 0.222 0.22 0.218
```

(^1) For the statistics of FFD, FPRT, TFT, and RRT, words with a value of 0
(not fixated) were excluded.
More distinct differences emerge when examining the reading measures with respect
to the text types, as displayed in Table 11. Whilefictionhas the lowestfirst-fixation
durationandfirst-pass reading time,poetryhas by far the longestfirst-fixation durations
andfirst-pass reading times. This is also reflected intotal-fixation time: the words
in the poems are, on average, fixated for the longest amount of time, while those in
fictional texts are fixated on for the shortest duration.

### 7.2 Psycholinguistic Analysis

As a proof-of-concept, we present a series of analyses that assess the effects of various
word-level psycholinguistic features on four reading measures:first-pass reading time
(FPRT; sum of the durations of all first-pass fixatinos on a word),total fixation time
(TFT; sum of the durations of all fixations on a word),fixation proportion(Fix; whether
or not a word was fixated), andfirst-pass regressions(FPReg; whether a regression was
initiated in the first-pass reading of a word). To do so, we deploy hierarchical linear-
mixed models with reading measuresyijobtained for wordj∈{ 1 ...J}, whereJis
the total number of words across all stimulus texts^17 read by participantias response
variables, and normalized (z-score transformed) predictorsword lengthlj(number
of characters including punctuation),Zipf frequencyfj,lexicalized surprisal

(^17) Note that we enumerate the words across all stimulus texts such that each word of each stimulus text
has its own index.

```
Table 11: Descriptive statistics of a selection of reading measures
for each text type. See Table 8 for a definition of the different
reading measures.^1
Non-fiction Fiction Poetry
Mean and standard deviation of continuous measures in ms
FFD 220.79±99.935 211.246±90.626 242.242±120.157
FPRT 262.891±145.72 239.13±122.998 296.138±171.722
TFT 309.957±208.142 272.512±169.158 404.261±284.231
RRT 285.469±207.77 253.637±165.551 349.679±262.204
Mean proportions of the binary measures
Fix 0.679 0.645 0.736
RR 0.189 0.17 0.333
Summarization Synopsis Key words
Mean and standard deviation of continuous measures in ms
FFD 223.367±100.731 223.991±105.15 225.396±105.051
FPRT 270.289±154.528 273.739±162.574 275.374±162.256
TFT 341.677±239.886 342.11±246.012 338.416±244.337
RRT 308.318±226.802 310.199±230.016 308.105±236.737
Mean proportions of the binary measures
Fix 0.724 0.718 0.696
RR 0.257 0.24 0.222
```

(^1) For the statistics of FFD, FPRT, TFT, and RRT, words with a value of 0
(not fixated) were excluded.
(GPT-2base)sj, andlast in linetj(binary: 1 if the word included a line-break),
formalized in Equation 11
yij=L(β 0 +β 0 i+β 1 lj+β 2 fj+β 3 sj+β 4 tj) , (11)
whereβ 0 denotes the global, andβ 0 ithe random intercept for subjecti.L(·) denotes
the linking function, in the case of the binary measures (first-pass regression,fixation
proportion),L(z) =ln 1 −zz, withyijfollowing a Bernoulli distribution; and in case of the
for the continuous measures (first-pass reading time,total fixation time)L(z) = logz,
withyijfollowing a log-normal distribution. We run each model for 3000 iterations
including 1000 warm-up iterations. We use standard uninformed priors, reported in
Appendix B.
We present posterior distributions (mean and 95% credible intervals) for the word
length, lexical frequency and surprisal coefficients in Figure 9. For the continuous
variables, the effect sizes are in milliseconds, for the binary variables in log-odds. We
see that all predictors are in line with their effect on processing effort: longer words
induce longer reading times, are more likely to be fixated, and are more likely to lead
to a successive regression. The same pattern can be observed for high-surprisal words
as well as for low-frequency words.

```
First−pass reading time Total fixation time
```

```
Fixated First−pass regression
```

```
Word length Lexical frequency Surprisal Word length Lexical frequency Surprisal
```

```
−0.2
```

```
−0.1
```

```
0.0
```

```
0.1
```

```
0.2
```

```
−20
```

```
−10
```

```
0
```

```
10
```

```
20
```

```
30
```

```
−0.4
```

```
0.0
```

```
0.4
```

```
0.8
```

```
1.2
```

```
−10
```

```
0
```

```
10
```

```
20
```

```
Predictor
```

```
Effect size
```

Fig. 9: Posterior distributions (mean and 95% credible interval) over the word length,
lexical frequency and surprisal coefficients, estimated via the Bayesian hierarchical
model presented in Eq. 11. The effect sizes (y-axis) represents milliseconds for the
continuous reading measures, log-odds for the binary reading measures.
